# Concision

So far we've concentrated on *clarity*.  By now we should be able to
write clearly, but we may sound simplistic and graceless, and that
might be held against us.  We should strive not only for clarity, but
for *grace* too, of which *concision* is a major trait.  Clarity and
concision intertwine intricately.

Academic writing should be concise, i.e., short and to the point.
Less is more: write less, and concentrate more on the quality of both
the information (have more to say), and the presentation (say it
better).  Academic texts are meant for academics who know their
fields, who read a lot, who prefer to have less text to process, and
who appreciate novel ideas the most.  Maybe the importance of
concision can be traced back to the days when journals were printed,
and paper was expensive.  The bottom line: **we want concise texts**.

As we strive for concision, we might make our texts harder to read
(and less clear), because we increasingly rely on specialized
knowledge we think a reader should have, and on implied information we
think a reader should easily figure out.  If we push the concision to
the extreme, we may get a terse text, gristle and bone.

# Spare the reader

Spare the reader and their mental effort, and drop what you can.
Superfluous information only obfuscates your novel ideas.

## Drop the meaningless

* really, actually, basically, typically

* in my opinion, generally speaking, practically speaking

## Drop redundant words

* meaningless nonsense -> nonsense

* painted in the red color -> painted red

## Replace a phrase with a right word

* lacking grace -> graceless

* not impossible -> possible

* use X instead of Y -> replace X with Y

## Rephrase negatives to affirmatives

* Don't write what you don't have to. -> Drop what you can.

# Go easy on...

**Hedging.** We should make claims that are always valid.  When we
know (or suspect) that our claim might be false, we hedge (relax) the
claim by qualifying it with: partially, usually, sometimes, mostly.
For example:

* Usually, you can take an address of an lvalue expression.

So, usually or always?  Maybe we just didn't know, played safe, and
made the sentence vague and longer.  Advice: **avoid hedging**.

**Intensifying.** We intensify a claim with: really, always, clearly.
For example:

* Clearly, you can always take an address of an lvalue expression.

But then, we can drop "clearly" and "always".  Advice: **avoid
intensifying**.

# Don't go overboard

If you remove too much (like hedging), you may sound rude, thoughtless
or uncompromising, and that usually rubs people the wrong way.  For
example:

* Governments fail in crisis.

* Governments usually fail in crisis.

Sometimes an extra 'perhaps', 'usually', 'in our opinion' or 'to the
best of our knowledge' is useful, as it hints some doubt.  Doubt is a
virtue in academia, which by nature is skeptical.  We're both wary and
weary of the guys who have a quick answer for everything.  A modicum
of humility and reservation goes a long way, especially when you have
something to say, and say it well.  If you want to make extraordinary
claims, you'd better have extraordinary proof, which is scarce.

# Conclusion

* Write succinctly to get your novel message across.

* You're likely to beat around the bush, if you have little to say.

* Hedge and intensify sparingly.  Don't go overboard with concision.

* Concision saves space.  Fill that space with meaningful information.

{% include ack %}
